How the Chess Pieces Move

Each of the 6 different kinds of pieces moves differently.
Pieces cannot move through other pieces (though the knight can jump over other pieces),
 and can never move onto a square with one of their own pieces. However, they can be
 moved to take the place of an opponent's piece which is then captured. Pieces are
 generally moved into positions where they can capture other pieces (by landing on
 their square and then replacing them), defend their own pieces in case of capture,
 or control important squares in the game.

How to Move the King in Chess
The king is the most important piece, but is one of the weakest. The king can only
move one square in any direction - up, down, to the sides, and diagonally.The king
may never move himself into check (where he could be captured). When the king is
attacked by another piece this is called "check".

How to Move the Queen in Chess
The queen is the most powerful piece. She can move in any one straight direction
- forward, backward, sideways, or diagonally - as far as possible as long as she
does not move through any of her own pieces.
And, like with all pieces, if the queen captures an opponent's piece her move is
over. Notice how the white queen captures the black queen and then the black king
is forced to move.

How to Move the Rook in Chess
The rook may move as far as it wants, but only forward, backward, and to the sides.
The rooks are particularly powerful pieces when they are protecting each other and
working together!

How to Move the Bishop in Chess
The bishop may move as far as it wants, but only diagonally. Each bishop starts on
one color (light or dark) and must always stay on that color. Bishops work well
together because they cover up each other's weaknesses.

How to Move the Knight in Chess
Knights move in a very different way from the other pieces – going two squares in
one direction, and then one more move at a 90 degree angle, just like the shape of
an “L”. Knights are also the only pieces that can move over other pieces.

How to Move the Pawn in Chess
Pawns are unusual because they move and capture in different ways: they move
forward, but capture diagonally. Pawns can only move forward one square at a time,
 except for their very first move where they can move forward two squares.
Pawns can only capture one square diagonally in front of them. They can never move
or capture backwards. If there is another piece directly in front of a pawn he
cannot move past or capture that piece.

Discover the Special Rules of Chess
There are a few special rules in chess that may not seem logical at first. They
were created to make the game more fun and interesting.

How to Promote a Pawn in Chess
Pawns have another special ability and that is that if a pawn reaches the other
side of the board it can become any other chess piece (called promotion).
A pawn may be promoted to any piece. A common misconception is that pawns may
only be exchanged for a piece that has been captured. That is NOT true. A pawn
 is usually promoted to a queen. Only pawns may be promoted.

How to do "en passant" in Chess
The last rule about pawns is called “en passant,” which is French for “in passing”.
If a pawn moves out two squares on its first move, and by doing so lands to the
side of an opponent's pawn (effectively jumping past the other pawn's ability to
capture it), that other pawn has the option of capturing the first pawn as it passes
by. This special move must be done immediately after the first pawn has moved past,
otherwise the option to capture it is no longer available.

How to Castle in Chess
One other special chess rule is called castling. This move allows you to do two
important things all in one move: get your king to safety (hopefully), and get
your rook out of the corner and into the game. On a player's turn he may move
his king two squares over to one side and then move the rook from that side's
corner to right next to the king on the opposite side. (See the example below.)
 However, in order to castle, the following conditions must be met:

it must be that king's very first move
it must be that rook's very first move
there cannot be any pieces between the king and rook to move
the king may not be in check or pass through check

Notice that when you castle one direction the king is closer to the side of the
board. That is called castling "kingside". Castling to the other side, through
where the queen sat, is called castling "queenside". Regardless of which side,
the king always moves only two squares when castling.

Who Makes the First Move in Chess
The player with the white pieces always moves first. Therefore, players generally
decide who will get to be white by chance or luck such as flipping a coin or
having one player guess the color of the hidden pawn in the other player's hand.
White then makes a move, followed by black, then white again, then black and so
on until the end of the game. Being able to move first is a tiny advantage which
 gives the white player an opportunity to attack right away.

Rules of How to Win a Game of Chess
There are several ways to end a game of chess: by checkmate, with a draw, by
resignation, by forfeit on time...

How to Checkmate in Chess
The purpose of the game is to checkmate the opponent's king. This happens when
the king is put into check and cannot get out of check.

There are only three ways a king can get out of check:

move out of the way (though he cannot castle!)
block the check with another piece or
capture the piece threatening the king.

If a king cannot escape checkmate then the game is over. Customarily the king
is not captured or removed from the board, the game is simply declared over.
The checkmate can happen in early stages in the game if one of the players does
not act carefully. Below, you will find an example of the Fools mate, a
checkmate that happens in just 2 moves.

How to Draw a Chess Game
Occasionally chess games do not end with a winner, but with a draw. There are 5
reasons why a chess game may end in a draw:

The position reaches a stalemate where it is one player's turn to move, but his
king is NOT in check and yet he does not have another legal move
The players may simply agree to a draw and stop playing
There are not enough pieces on the board to force a checkmate (example: a king
and a bishop vs.a king)
A player declares a draw if the same exact position is repeated three times
(though not necessarily three times in a row)
Fifty consecutive moves have been played where neither player has moved a pawn
or captured a piece